I'm Chris Kane.
I'm a software engineer
on the Cocoa team.
You, hopefully,
are here to hear about something
to do with multithreading in Cocoa.
I'm going to be talking a
little bit today about a few
general multithreading topics,
and then I'll be getting into
some of the Cocoa APIs that we
provide for multithreading and to
support you in your multithreading.
[Transcript missing]
Well, of course, you know,
at the beginning we have
to give our definitions.
And so here's my definition
of what is multithreading.
When I talk about multithreading,
I'm talking about executing
multiple chunks of code
simultaneously in your program.
Now, on a single processor machine,
you can do this by using the
preemptive multitasking that
the operating system provides.
And so it's simulated concurrency.
But as we are moving
forward here in the future,
and in the future,
we're going to be seeing a lot more true
concurrency from these dual-processor,
now quad-processor machines
that we've been shipping.
Now,
another way to achieve multithreading is,
of course, to spawn other processes,
but I'm not going to
be talking about that.
Of course,
the user is running many apps while
they're logged in and using the system,
and each of those apps has their own set
of threads and is doing its own thing.
I'm not going to be talking about
concurrency or multithreading
via separate processes,
but rather just about threads
within the same process.
Now, the traditional approach,
or the traditional reason
for multithreading was to
avoid blocking the event loop.
That is, if you had a long-running
task that you wanted to do,
say when the user hit a
certain button or whatever,
you could spawn off another thread,
do that long-running
processing in the background,
and remain responsive to the user as the
user continued to fiddle with your UI.
That was a traditional
reason for multithreading.
Sometimes multithreading is useful
because it can simplify the code.
Another approach to achieving
apparent concurrency,
I'll call it,
to the user is to use asynchronous
APIs and register to receive callbacks
when things happen and so on.
But that can cause you to have to
chunk up the logic of your program
across several different types of
callback functions and whatnot.
And so sometimes multithreading
can simplify code.
But the main reason that we're going to
be seeing now and going into the future,
it seems,
is to achieve performance improvement.
There was a time when
machines ran at 100 megahertz.
And then the machines,
the next generation of machines came
out and they ran at 150 megahertz.
And so the existing applications got a
little performance boost out of that.
And eventually there were 500
MHz machines and GHz machines
and 3 GHz machines and so on.
And the existing apps,
the apps which didn't change, I mean,
were getting performance improvements
sort of for free by way of the
processor speed increasing.
What we see,
it looks like going into the future,
is that processors are going
to be gaining multiple cores.
And in order to take advantage
of the multiple cores,
you have to use threads.
Because threads are the way
that the operating system
allows you to address each core,
if you will.
And so to put work on a core,
you have to use multiple threads.
I'm going to do a quick demo here.
Now this demo,
if we can go to the demo machine,
oh we already have.
All I've set up here
is a very trivial app.
And what I have is a bunch of work
to be done on a bunch of images,
an array of images I have.
And the work is-- maybe it's
some sort of warp or some sort
of color changing operation to
each image that I'm going to do.
The details don't matter.
What I have here in the left column,
what I want to point
out is in parentheses,
I've put in an estimate based
on the size of each image of the
amount of work it's going to take.
So first what I'm going to do,
I've got a 1 up there in that top box.
And what that top box is is the
number of threads that I'm going
to use to process these images.
So let me go ahead.
I'm going to start this up.
And of course, it begins chunking away.
As each image is finished,
it shows up in the rightmost column.
Now at the same time now,
I'm going to show what happens
if I use instead three threads.
And of course, the obvious thing happens.
I'm doing things three times-- well,
maybe roughly three times faster.
And of course, using three threads,
I can process the array that much faster.
Now, in some sense,
I've faked up this demo,
and I'm not really doing a lot of
serious work underneath the covers.
But what this allows me to do is
I'm going to pretend I have 10
cores and spawn off 10 different
threads to process these images.
And of course, I'm going
[Transcript missing]
The way that you got processor
speed up in the past with
increasing processor speed,
clock speed, is going to be changed if we
can go back to the slides.
And now we're going to be going back,
going into a world in which
multiple threads are going to
be a key tool to get performance
improvement in your applications.
Now, unfortunately,
not everything works out just so nicely.
You can't just create
threads and go do the work.
There's a little problem.
There are many problems
that come about when you go
starting to do multithreading.
By and large, most of them devolve
down to one key issue.
That is,
changes to shared data by multiple
threads ends up being the cause
of most multithreading issues.
Now,
there's actually two flavors of this.
One is that the obvious one,
and hopefully, you know,
I'm assuming here that
you have some experience,
so that you've run into this one or
you've heard about this one before.
If you are changing data in
multiple threads at the same time,
of course, you can produce invalid data,
invalid results,
invalid states in the data.
That is,
the threads can conflict with one
another in producing their changes.
[Transcript missing]
The second thread gets done with
instant increment and writes
the value out to its value,
its incremented value, out to memory.
And what's happened?
The change that thread
one made has been lost.
This is a classic example.
B only got incremented once,
which in some sense could be
an invalid state in your data.
You've lost the work that
the first thread tried to do.
Let me show quickly an example
of a visibility hazard.
So we start with the
same integer in memory.
And the first-- both threads,
we're going to assume,
see the value as 5 out in memory.
The first thread is going
to increment the value.
And it writes out six out to my memory.
At some later point,
perhaps it's briefly later,
or it might be quite a bit later,
quite a bit in terms of the
CPU processor time at least,
the second thread is gonna
come along and it's gonna load
the value at that address,
that B value.
But it may only load it from, say,
its L1 cache.
And it's gonna print that value out.
But it prints out five because
it still sees the value five.
The first process,
the first thread on the first
processor has not broadcast the
information that has changed
B out to the other processors.
And so that is the source
of this visibility problem
in this particular case.
So because there are these problems
that come about when you try to
execute code at the same time,
this notion of thread
safety is introduced.
And for this particular purpose,
I'm focusing on intrinsic thread safety.
So what I mean by intrinsic thread safety
here is that a caller does not have to
worry about the activities of that API,
for example, or that functionality,
that feature.
When the caller is using that
functionality on multiple threads,
that is, the caller does not have to
take any additional action.
And that is a piece of functionality,
a piece of software,
which is intrinsically thread-safe.
It's, in some sense, built-in.
The thread safety is built-in.
Now, typically, though,
intrinsic thread safety does
not protect compound operations.
So that if you make one call,
and then you make another call,
and then you make another call
into the same functionality,
its intrinsic thread safety does
not necessarily provide safety
across all of those separate calls.
That is,
the first call may happen safely,
then the second call may happen safely,
but things may change
in between those calls.
Now the Cocoa documentation
talks about what things are
intrinsically thread-safe,
and I'll be mentioning this
again a little bit later.
Many things in Cocoa are not
intrinsically thread-safe,
but most can be used in a thread-safe
way by taking additional action.
[Transcript missing]
and his team at the
University of California,
California, have been working on a new
application that will help you
get the most out of your Mac.
Now, how do you avoid these problems?
Well,
if the main problem is that multiple
threads changing shared data,
[Transcript missing]
In practice, of course,
this is not realistic.
And most actual functional
types of solutions devolve,
again, here we have two types.
The first is you can change the way
that the code or data is structured.
And the second is you can
augment the code with more code.
So let me look at the first of those.
Well,
if you have data and it's immutable,
say you're using an immutable
collection or you're simply treating
it as immutable is constant,
then of course there's no issue
because you're not changing data.
And changing data, changing shared data,
is one of the controls that you can use.
contributing factors to
most threading issues.
The second approach
is thread confinement,
that I'm going to talk about at least,
is thread confinement.
Thread confinement means
Only one thread is going to look at
or use or change a particular value.
So the most trivial example is,
of course, all the local variables on the
stack are generally confined
to that particular thread.
You don't have to worry about
the thread safety of writing
and reading local variables.
Second type of thread confinement
is thread-specific data.
Most thread packages offer some
sort of thread-specific data,
and of course Cocoa does as well.
Another approach is to
use dedicated threads.
Suppose you have a very
complex data structure,
and it would be very complicated,
perhaps, to try to allow multiple threads
to access that complicated
data structure thread safely.
What you can do is you can dedicate
a thread to be responsible for
accessing that data structure,
and then funnel all requests to
actually process or work with that
data structure through that thread
and make that thread actually do the
work and look at that data structure.
If you have a dedicated thread,
you may need to communicate with it.
Another form of changing how your
data or your code is structured is
to add communication between threads.
One has to be a little careful
with thread confinement because
you have to be careful not to
publish to global data structures.
You can publish, say,
something to a global data
structure by assigning it to a
static global in a source file.
Or there are certainly global structures
like the NS Notification Center,
which if you put an observer
in the Notification Center,
the Notification Center is public,
it's global to the entire process,
not just any particular thread.
And so when you put an observer
in the Notification Center,
it's not just a thread,
it's a whole thread.
And so when you put an observer
in the Notification Center,
you've published that
object to all the threads.
And so you've lost any hope of thread
confinement for that particular object.
Object confinement is another approach.
This is one where you have,
perhaps again,
a complex data structure that
you don't want to get into trying
to make thread safe itself.
What you can do is create
a facade type object,
a front object,
some sort of proxy through which
you funnel all your requests
to that complex data structure.
So you create an object which
acts as a front and you can
make that object thread safe.
Without necessarily making
a whole big gnarly object
graph behind it thread safe.
And there are also other special
purpose data structures and various
sorts of lockless techniques.
I don't have nearly enough time
to go into those kind of issues,
so I'm going to gloss over that.
The second approach to
making something thread-safe,
second general approach I should say,
is to augment the code.
And this is the usual technique
that most of you would be,
I hope,
familiar with coming into this talk.
You add locks around the code
that is doing the augmentation.
shows a dangerous operation.
So locks are one form.
Conditioned objects are
another way to protect data,
protect chunks of code from
executing simultaneously.
There are also atomic operations or
barrier instructions that one can insert.
The nice thing about these is that
they take care of both of the issues,
both the change conflict type
issues and the visibility issues.
That is, if you use a lock,
the operating system has,
the people working on
the operating system,
I should say,
have written the locks so that both the
visibility issues are addressed and the
change conflict issues are addressed.
Now, once one solves the threading
issues with very simple,
you know, sort of does the simple changes
to solve the threading issues,
one might introduce secondary problems.
And so there are whole classes of
secondary issues that come about by
trying to make things thread safe.
You know, deadlock and livelock
are classic examples.
Performance problems can occur.
One in particular would be
if many things are trying,
many threads are trying to get access
to a particular data structure,
you often run into issues
like lock contention,
where if only one thing can change
the data structure at a time,
all the other threads
are blocked waiting,
trying to get in,
to get access to that data structure.
And you've lost a...
possibly lost some of the performance
improvement you could have had
if there was no contention.
[Transcript missing]
It comes about when you
use per-thread data.
If you use per-thread data and you very
carefully set up a data structure on a
particular thread in a particular way,
and the code then is going to
come along later and use that
per-thread data structure,
What happens is that
the code now is coupled,
is bound in some sense to that very
carefully initialized data structure.
And so that code can't be just
arbitrarily run on another thread.
Another thread will have a
different copy of that per-thread
data if it has any at all.
It doesn't necessarily have the
copy that exists on the thread
the code was supposed to run on.
And so this limits, this being execution
environment coupling,
limits your ability to move
code around and run code on new
threads when you're trying to
take advantage of multithreading.
A classic example of per-thread
data that runs into this is,
of course, the run loop system,
where you put sources in the run loop
and the run loop is a per-thread object.
And then you try to run some
code on a different thread.
And those sources aren't registered
with that run loop on that thread.
So those are some of the general issues.
I'm going to get into a little
bit more about Cocoa now.
And I'm going to cover some NSThread
APIs and some of the lock APIs that
we have and some of the ways that
you can communicate between threads.
Cocoa also has immutable objects
like immutable arrays and immutable
data structures and so on.
I'm not going to talk
any more about that,
but of course, as I said before,
using immutable objects is a way of
achieving a form of thread safety because
immutable objects can't be changed,
and so you know you're, in some sense,
you know you're safe.
Cocoa also has immutable objects
like immutable arrays and immutable
data structures and so on.
I'm not going to talk
any more about that,
but of course, as I said before,
using immutable objects is a way of
achieving a form of thread safety because
immutable objects can't be changed,
and so you know you're, in some sense,
you know you're safe.
I'm not going to be talking
about those functionality in
any more detail in this talk.
NSThread is the way you create
new threads and new threads
are the way you separate work
to be done by different cores.
You can create a new thread using the
DetachNewThreadSelectorToTargetWithObject
method.
In Leopard we now allow you to create
NSThread objects without creating
the underlying operating code.
This allows you to create
threads which aren't yet running.
When you want the thread to run,
you use the thread method start.
That creates the underlying
operating system thread and starts
the thread off doing its work.
What is the thread doing?
The thread has called the
main method in NSThread.
This is the point where if
you're subclassing NSThread,
you would have to create a
thread that is not yet running.
You would override main and in main do
the work that you want the thread to do.
If you were doing a dedicated thread,
for example,
you would probably approach that by
subclassing NSThread and overriding
main to do the body of the work.
When the start method is called,
what it does is it creates
a new underlying operating
system thread and causes main,
the main method.
to be invoked in the
context of that new threat.
If you have an existing
method on an existing object,
we also have a convenience method
on NSThread now where you can sort
of ramp an NSThread around that
method on that object and have
that method be your thread body,
the work that the thread is doing.
We've added a few more
features to NSThread,
like cancellation.
But this isn't cancellation in the
sense of POSIX Pthread cancellation.
Rather, all it is is an advisory state,
a Boolean, which you can set by calling
the cancel method on a thread.
And what's supposed to happen is that
the code running on the thread can pull
the cancellation state once in a while,
at safe points, presumably,
and decide that it
should shut itself down.
So it's a sort of requesting
that the thread cancel itself,
that the work being done by main stop.
We've added other state like
is executing and is finished.
So you can find out what
the threads are doing.
And NS threads are going
to be KVO compliant.
I don't think they're fully KVO compliant
in the leopard seed that you have.
But the intent is that
threads will be KVO compliant.
And so you can hook them up
with bindings and say observe
an array of threads if you wish.
And perhaps even display a
UI like the activity view.
And then you can use the user and mail
to show what the threads are doing.
Now, of course, Cocoa also has locks.
These are lock classes wrapping
the underlying Pthread,
POSIX Pthread implementation.
The Objective-C language also
offers the atSynchronized directive,
which creates a block which is
synchronized by the object that you give,
the atSynchronized directive.
And all this means is that the lock
is essentially the object itself,
or the object acts like the lock,
perhaps would be a
better way to put that.
and again, I can't talk about these
things in any detail.
You have to go to the documentation
to read more about them.
Condition objects wrap the underlying
POSIX Pthread condition objects.
And we have a new one that we've
exposed called NSCondition in Leopard,
but it exists in Tiger and
all previous releases as well.
It simply wasn't exposed as an API.
NSCondition is a, since it's new,
I'll talk about it a little bit,
is a more powerful, I would say,
way of using condition objects
than NSCondition lock was.
You can do more complicated
predicates using NSConditions.
But again,
I can't talk about these things in any
detail because I'm very time constrained.
The clock is ticking here.
I talked about dedicated
threads and one way,
one thing we have to support use
of dedicated threads is to be able
to perform selector on thread.
So you can send this message to
any object and tell that object to,
in the context of the given thread,
perform that method.
This is a very powerful way to
communicate information between threads.
It's also a powerful way to,
if you have a dedicated thread,
to give that dedicated thread work to do.
You can call the work the selector,
the method that you're
telling it to invoke.
And, you know,
and of course the object receiver
of this method is the implicit
receiver of that message as well.
And so you can give that dedicated
thread work to do by using perform
selector on thread as well as the
more typical use which would be
to just communicate information.
The perform selector on main
thread method that existed,
well, since Panther at least,
I forget if we added it to
Jaguar or if it was Panther,
that method is now sort of a special
case of this where the thread parameter
is simply the main thread object.
Now what is one way in which you can
use this perform selector mechanism?
Well,
There's something I like to
call the receptionist pattern,
which is you can create objects
that act as a proxy or a front
for a real intended receiver.
And this is useful when you have
an object you want to message
from the context of some thread,
but it isn't safe for that object
to actually receive and do that,
invoke that method on that
or any particular thread.
For example,
you have an object which is only
safe to use on the main thread.
You can use something like a
receptionist to get the information over.
So what a proxy,
the receptionist does is it's simply an
object that records the messages that
it receives and arranges to have them
delivered on the main thread instead.
So for example,
I have a set title method here that
I implemented that I want to invoke
on the real destination object.
Maybe it's a window object.
What I do is I implement set
title on the receptionist.
And I have a set title for
the receptionist object class.
And what the receptionist simply does
is it turns around and tells the target,
its real target,
which I've had to initialize
the receptionist with,
to perform set title on the main thread.
So this is fairly straightforward.
What you would do then is use the
receptionist object in place of
the real object whenever you needed
to address some message to the,
of course, real object.
Now sometimes you have methods
which have more complicated
parameters than a simple object.
And you may need then
to create a memo object,
which just is a data-bearing object
that remembers all the arguments.
In this particular example,
I'm creating a memo object where
I'm passing the ID and the int,
the two arguments, to the complex method,
to the memo for it to remember.
And I'm going to tell the memo,
instead of the real target,
I'm going to tell the memo to
dispatch itself on the main thread,
in this particular case,
with the given target.
And what will happen is
that on the main thread,
at some point,
the dispatch to target method will
be called on the little memo object.
And all the memo object does is call
complex method then on the real target
that I intended to receive the message.
And so that has gotten the
invocation of the complex
method over to the main thread.
Of course,
the logical extension of this is you
can... have a receptionist object,
which is actually a proxy,
doesn't implement any methods.
And NS invocation would
be your memo object.
The NS invocation and the forward
invocation method becomes the memo,
and you can tell the invocation to
invoke itself over on the main thread by
using perform selector on main thread.
Now, how do you go about
making work concurrent?
Let me take a little sidebar here.
Well,
the traditional approach was to use,
to do several completely
different things.
That was a typical approach.
In the future,
we're going to be seeing more of what
I've highlighted in the second bullet.
That is decomposing a chunk of work,
a large chunk of work,
into multiple pieces.
The most simple type of this
example would be where you have
an array of the same type of
object as in my demo program.
I had an array of images.
An array where you want to do the same
thing to every object in the array.
That's a very simple approach.
There are many systems like OpenMP and
so on that some of you may be familiar
with that help facilitate splitting up,
doing work over an array of
something across multiple threads.
Another thing,
another type of decomposition is where
you have a big thing that you want
to work on as sort of a logically
single unit where you can split it
up in some way and then successfully
merge the result back together.
For example,
you might have a large image which
you want to color process in some
way and perhaps it's possible for
you to split the image in half,
do the processing of the two
halves on separate threads and then
stitch the results back together.
Of course,
if what you're doing is rotating
the image or applying some very
complex mesh warp algorithm
or whatever it happens to be,
then it may be nearly impossible
to do that on two different
threads and successfully stitch
the results back together.
So, of course, this is a technique that
only applies in some cases.
One case would be, for example,
sorting an array.
If you have a large array
and you want to sort it,
well, sorting is sort of a
logically single operation.
That is, you're operating on all
the elements of the array.
But you can divide an
array up into two pieces,
sort the two halves,
and apply a merge sort type merge
operation to the two sorted arrays
to produce your final array.
So there's a way to go about doing that.
In Leopard, we've added an abstraction
for a task called NSOperation.
And all this, and what I mean by task is
just a bit of work to do,
not task in the sense of a new process.
The intent here is to offer
an abstraction and a way,
an approach perhaps,
to decomposing your code,
to structuring your code.
So the intent is to help
you design your programs.
So operations can be
themselves concurrent or not.
That's a key element.
An operation which is concurrent
does its own threading,
but operations do not
have to be concurrent.
They can just be straight line
pieces of code without doing
any particular threading at all.
Operations also introduce
a concept of readiness.
So in the base class, NSOperation,
An operation is ready when
all of its dependencies,
all of its dependent, the operations it
depends on have finished.
So operations can depend
on other operations.
Of course, the classic example of
this would be linking.
When you hit the Xcode hammer button
and it goes off and builds things,
well, it can't do the link until it's
done all the compile steps.
And so the link step depends
on all the compile steps having
finished before it can begin.
work.
Another point I should make, of course,
is that NS operations are KVO compliant,
so you can observe them through bindings.
You can observe them through key
value observing and also bind to
them and display them in the UI.
And as operation Q,
we introduce in Leopard to allow you
to apply some form of flow control,
basically,
to your execution of operations.
So you may have, for example,
a thousand operations.
The user hits a button and now
there's a thousand operations
that need to be invoked.
And of course,
the Xcode example applies here as well.
You hit build and all your
source files need to be compiled.
Well, obviously,
somebody at some point tried that.
Spawn off a thousand GCC processes and
build them all simultaneously and then
do the link step when they were all done.
And they tried that and it was
an abysmal failure because...
Well, there's any number of reasons,
of course.
But, you know, if each GCC is using, say,
just 50 megabytes and you
spawn off 1,000 of them,
well,
now you have 50,000 megabytes of RAM that
are desired by all the processes running.
So, you know,
it just doesn't work to spawn off and
run all the GCCs at the same time.
So what Xcode does, of course,
is spawns off two at a time if
you're on a dual-processor Mac.
So you can either use a dual-core
machine or four at a time if
you're on a four-core machine.
And that's the rule of thumb they've
chosen for applying concurrency.
What NSOperationQ does is you can
tune the amount of concurrency you
get in execution of the operations
that you put in the queue.
And so if you want two at a time to run,
you can turn the knob and set
two as the amount of concurrency,
or four at a time, and so on.
And what happens is that operations that
are put in the queue that are ready are
started as previous operations finish.
And so what the OperationQ is
doing is it's churning through
the operations for you,
and you can sort of turn it loose and
let it do its thing once you've put
all the operations that you have in it.
And OperationQ is also KVO compliant,
and so you can bind up
UI like a table view.
And to it,
and display all the operations that
are going on in the background,
much again like the
activity viewer in mail.
So let me give you a simple example.
This example comes from the demo.
So I have a warp an image
operation which I'm going to
apply over an array of images.
So for each image,
I'm warping it and I'm adding the object,
the new image, to the new images array.
What I'm going to do is I'm going to
create a new class called Image Warp to
abstract the loop, basically.
I'm going to make it a non-concurrent
subclass of NSOperation.
So I'm not going to worry about
doing the threading myself.
What happens when a non-concurrent
operation is discovered in the
queue by NSOperation queue,
it creates the thread for the
operation and runs the operation in the
context of that new temporary thread.
I'm also going to move that loop to a
new class method on the ImageWarp class.
I'm going to call that
method ProcessImages.
And what this move allows me to do is,
well, for one thing, it reduces the one,
two, three,
six lines above down to one line.
But it also allows me to do
something different in that loop.
So I'm going to embed the logic of
the loop off in a method so I can
change it in the future if I wanted to.
What does process images look like then?
Well,
I'm going to create an operation queue,
fairly straightforward.
I'm going to create an array to receive
all the new images like I did before.
And for each image,
I'm going to create instead an
image warp operation object.
I'm going to tell it which
image it's supposed to process,
and I'm going to tell it the
array in which it's supposed
to add the resulting image.
Then I'm going to add that
operation to the operation queue.
And as soon as I begin adding
operations to the operation queue,
it's going to start
churning on them right away.
Meanwhile, my for loop will finish.
I'll put all the operations in the queue.
I'm going to wait until all
the operations are finished.
I'm going to release the queue,
and I'm going to return
the array of new images.
Now, of course,
there was a call to warp an
image in my previous loop.
Well, that moves to the main
method of NSOperation.
So the body of the loop becomes
the core of the operation.
: So what the main method is going to do,
it's going to warp the image that it
was given when I initialized the object,
and it's going to add the result to
the result array that I gave it when
I initialized the operation object.
Now of course, many objects,
many operation objects
are poking at this array,
so I have to add some synchronization
around that to protect that.
Now NSOperation,
we're introducing it as a tool
to help you structure your code.
It's not the be-all and
end-all of threading.
There are many approaches
to doing multithreading,
many abstractions one
can use to assist in
writing or decomposing programs
and making them concurrent.
Now, of course, you can still use threads
as you have before.
We haven't changed that.
One thing I'm going to point out, though,
is that an operation queue
is a place where you put an
operation to happen later.
So if you want something
to occur right away,
say you want to start an animation,
you wouldn't necessarily create
an operation for that animation,
you know, create by,
by which I mean structure
your code into an operation.
And, you know, do that operation later by
putting in an operation queue.
You want the animation
probably to start right away.
Operations then don't have to be
used in the context of a queue.
You can call start on one right away.
If you put it in the queue,
of course at some later point
the queue will get to it and call
start and start that operation.
But you don't have to do that.
So the key point I'm trying to
make here is that NSOperation and
NSOperationQ are just one way to approach
task decomposition within your programs.
[Transcript missing]
So I could give you a rule of thumb
like in splitting up the pieces to say,
well, how small should work be?
I could give you an example,
which is don't make your work--
The thing that's going to be
done by that thread less than
10 microseconds of computation.
And there's your answer.
10 microseconds.
How do I know how long this work is
going to take before I actually do it?
That's one problem.
If it takes 10 microseconds or
100 microseconds on this machine,
well,
it might take a completely different
amount of time on this other machine.
And so there's no simple answer that
applies across various architectures.
And of course,
as machines speed up in the future,
all your answers change.
And so what I would suggest is
don't worry too much about the time.
Don't worry too much about
decomposing your work into
two fine pieces at this point.
It's just a waste of time.
In a sense, you'd be over-optimizing.
And tuning to a particular processor
or particular architecture like your
dual-core at home won't necessarily
improve things for the user.
Let me get back to
multithreading in Cocoa.
Well,
I started by talking about thread safety.
Well, unfortunately, at this point,
I have to just point you to the
documentation to answer the question,
what APIs are thread safe
in Cocoa and which aren't.
There's no way I can cover that
in the timeframe allowed here.
Now, as I pointed out at the beginning,
many things aren't
intrinsically thread-safe.
And if you don't see that a class says
it's thread-safe in the documentation,
you have to assume that it's
not intrinsically thread-safe.
But of course,
you can use locks and other safety
measures that I've discussed
already to use these things in
a multi-threaded environment.
I talked earlier about transferring work.
This is what I call what happens when
you use perform select on main thread.
You're transferring the work that you
wanted to do on the main thread over to,
say, the main thread.
I mean, you're transferring the work
you wanted to do on the current
thread over to a different
thread to have it do it instead.
And the app kit, of course,
in some places does this
sort of thing for you.
If you tell a view to display,
for example, it doesn't actually do the
drawing on that thread.
What the view does is it arranges
for the view to be redrawn off in
the context of the main thread.
But again, not all is ideal here.
Transferring work can
cause its own issues,
and I'm going to illustrate that.
So what I have here is a do work
method which only wants to run in
the context of the main thread.
So it tests to see if it's running
in the context of the main thread.
And if it's not,
it tells itself to perform do work
in the context of the main thread by
using perform selector on main thread.
If the thread is the main
thread that DoWork is called on,
it will actually just go ahead and do it.
Now we introduce a subclass,
and the subclass wants to enhance
DoWork to do some more work.
So what the subclass does
is it calls super DoWork.
And it does its own thing,
whatever the subclass wants to do.
But this has caused two
problems to be introduced,
two very subtle problems.
The first is that the superclass
has not actually done its work when
the subclass goes to do more stuff.
The superclass pushed its
work over to the main thread
to be done at a later time.
Well,
what does that mean for the subclass?
Has it assumed that the superclass,
because it called super do work,
has done that work?
Has all the data structures
that the superclass was
supposed to update been updated?
No.
They're going to be updated
later on the main thread.
The second problem is that the subclass
is going to do its thing twice.
At least in this particular formulation.
Do work has been called
on the background thread.
And the subclass called super do work.
And then it did the work.
Its own work.
Well,
when that do work method is re-invoked
on the object in the main thread,
The subclass is going
to receive that method.
It's going to call super do work.
And super is actually going to do
it because it's the main thread.
And then it's going to do its
more stuff thing again in the
context of the main thread.
Well, what does that mean?
Who knows?
Is it okay that the subclass's
work is going to be done twice?
Is the subclass prepared for that?
Who knows?
It depends on the particular example,
the particular thing that's going on.
So transferring work like this is not
a panacea for making things thread
safe or approaching thread safety.
[Transcript missing]
But what's not made thread-safe
thereby is the operations that occur
outside the context of the set method.
KVO is called that for you before
your set foo method is invoked.
And those are not being wrapped
by that lock you introduced.
So those things are not thread-safe.
And what happens then is that in
the did change value for key method,
when the observers are
being all notified,
the KVO subsystem goes down the line,
tells all the observers,
observe value at key path and so on.
All that is happening outside
the context of a lock.
And it's all happening in
some sort of arbitrary order.
So if an observer...
believes the information that it
receives in the change dictionary,
that information may be out
of date if multiple objects,
multiple threads rather,
are changing this
property of this object.
Those observances,
those notifications are being received in
essentially kind of an arbitrary order.
Well, one solution is, of course,
to use manual notification and put
the lock around the will change
value for key and the change in
the did change value for key.
And what this does is it
makes sure that nobody else,
no other thread,
changes that foo property until all
the observers have been notified
of the change as a result of
this current thread changing it.
Of course, having to use manual
KVO notification is kind of a bummer.
The automatic notification is
a very convenient mechanism.
One approach to fixing that would be
to use a receptionist type pattern to
push the actual change and the resulting
KVO observances over to the main thread.
Another class of things
that arise relatedly is,
of course, bindings in Cocoa.
Cocoa views and currently
Cocoa controllers are not
particularly thread-safe.
And so what one has to do then is
get those KVO notifications over
to the main thread in some way to
be invoked in the safe context.
That is,
views should be generally accessed
in the main thread for the
work that the KVO notification
is going to cause in them.
The problem is that it's not clear how
to do that with bindings at this point.
And this is an active area
of investigation for us.
Cocoa is doing most of the work
for you underneath the covers.
That is,
it's doing the KVO ad observer calls,
the KVO registration.
You don't really have a hook into that.
So you can't substitute
a different object.
You can't substitute, say,
a receptionist-type object to
capture those KVO messages and
send them over to the main thread.
So as I said, this is an active area
of investigation for us,
how to enable multithreading
with the bindings,
or at least make it more convenient.
Core data, another aspect of Cocoa.
Well, of course,
if you're on the Cocoa dev mailing list,
you've seen any number
of discussions on this.
And I can't go into any detail,
but they recommend that if
you use a separate managed
object context for each thread,
the locking will be taken
care of for you by core data.
Some classes in core data
implement NS locking and can be
locked explicitly if you need to,
but you really have to go
see the documentation to
find out more about this.
Sometimes Cocoa already
offers built-in concurrency.
You can tell a file handle, for example,
to read in background and notify,
and Cocoa will spawn off the thread
and do the read in the background.
The pulsing button animations that occur,
say when you bring up an open
panel and the OK button is pulsing,
those are occurring in
a background thread,
and those things are
taken care of for you.
The ideal situation
for you as a developer,
of course, would be for Cocoa to
do a lot of concurrency,
to do a lot of use of the separate
cores available in the machine,
so you can just write your
straight-line code without having
to think about any of these issues.
The problem comes about because
when we need to call back into you,
we don't know that you're thread safe.
For example,
I talked about sorting an array earlier.
We could split the array in
the sorting array function.
We can split the array into two,
sort the two halves,
and merge the result back together.
But the sorting process involves
calling your compare function.
Now, it seems like compare functions,
compare methods, whatever,
should be immutable.
They shouldn't be changing things
as a result of being called.
That is,
nothing should change out in memory
as a result of the compare operation.
But we don't know that.
That's a problem.
Another example would be, say,
in computing TableView's row update
information or in saving documents.
But in the case of a table view,
it needs to compute its row information,
row updates, and so on,
what goes in the boxes, for example,
by talking to the data source.
The data source comes from you.
We don't know that it would be safe
to start calling the data source
concurrently in multiple threads.
Saving a document, another example.
But we don't know that the delegate
won't be surprised when it's
called on a background thread
to actually go and package up
the data and do the save operation.
So one thing we want you to think about
going forward here is making perhaps
chunks of your code like delegates and
data sources or compare operations.
Things where you give,
you sort of hook in to the Cocoa system.
Think about making those threads safe.
And so in the future, we can,
when we add, say,
suppose we add a functionality
like set thread safe delegate
on a particular class.
Well, you can then at that point
immediately take advantage of
that kind of new capability.
Think about making those threads safe.
And so in the future, we can,
when we add, say,
suppose we add a functionality
like set thread safe delegate
on a particular class.
Well, you can then at that point
immediately take advantage of
that kind of new capability.
But it seems like in the future,
multiple cores are the way
that processors are going.
And to use multiple cores,
you have to use multiple threads
because thread is the concept that
the operating system provides to
address work to those different cores.
But there are a lot of complex issues.
Cocoa has some APIs to help you
deal with these multi-threading
problems and the various issues.
And in the future,
we expect to have more and do more.
And we're ourselves investigating
these things ongoing.
But to get
Real nice performance
improvement in the future.
You're going to have to start doing
threading and being multi-threaded.
and perhaps after a few years when we
have these eight processor systems,
your apps will be just so much
better than they are today.
Thank you.